How To Debug! 

# To Dos For All Errors

1) R E M A I N C A L M
2) GET HELP (doesn't have to be someone who knows more, a fresh pair of eyes can go a long way)
3) TAKE A BREAK (freshen your own damn eyes)
4) Google The Error  (list the tools you're using, list the language your using, look for someone generating the error in the same or similar context to you). 
5) Avoid compound errors: 
	1)test your code as you write it.  
	2) Consider **writing tests** for your code too! 
	3) (Corollary: Practice good git hygiene -- commit early and often, use branches to work out tricky features, so that you can always revert to a last-working-version if you break everything and destroy the universe.)
6) If you have trouble either pinpointing where the error is being thrown, or exactly what is causing it, try this:
	1) Comment out a wide berth of possibly-offending code, so that you disappear the error.
	2) systematically start to comment it back in, see when you *first* generate the error again.  
	3) If you know *where* it's being thrown, but can't spot why, try writing it out again from fresh, to see if you write over the offending bug. 

7) Don't Fear the Error Message! They are here to help!


## Loud Errors
-- times when we get error messages! These are the good times. The happy times. 

### To-do's for all Loud Errors:
1) Read the error message. R E A D I T
2) Read the stack-trace to figure out *where* the error is being thrown.
3) If the error is being thrown by your node modules, keep going down the stack trace to hopefully find the bit that *is* being thrown by your code (express probably does not have a bug in it).  
	3a) if you go through the WHOLE thing and none of it is your code, check what modules are throwing the error, and start checking the places where you use them.

*Types of Error Messages* 
Ones you'll see a lot: 
1. Syntax Error: Your code won't parse.  Translation: You have a typo.  
	Solutions:
	 1) install a linter 
	 2) practice good formatting habits to begin with (*consistent* spacing and indentation, semicolons, etc)
	 3) know that a syntax error will be generated by the line where the code itself breaks -- often the actual typo might be in the lines above (or below, if you have a brackets problem)

2. TypeError: your code expects a variable to be one *kind* of thing, but it is in fact another.  This is one that you'll see a lot, because it can be caused by lots of different kinds of screw ups.  error messages like "cannot read {property} of undefined" or "{such and such} is not a function" are generally type errors.  This is a very non-exhuastive list of solutions, to give you an idea of where to start looking.  
	Solutions: 
	1) console.log(typeof offendingVariable) to see if it's what you expect/need.
	2) check the formatting of your function -- is it being called *on* what it should be called on, is it structured correctly? 
	3) is your data moving where it should?  (console.log your function arguments and maybe their types?)
	4) if this error is being thrown by your use of a library, check the docs to see if you're using it right. 
		4a) try to find examples of other people using that tool!

3. ReferenceError:  You're referencing a variable that does not exist.  Solution: look for where you think you've defined it, or where you should have defined it. you will likely find that you have either a) made a typo, b) imported/exported incorrectly c) not actually declared it at all or d) made a scoping error (eg, using "let" inside an "if" block, and then referencing that variable outside the code block).

Ones you'll probably see less often:
1. RangeError: Raised when a numeric variable exceeds its allowed range (solution: don't do complicated math in javascript. or at least, use a special mathy library for it. alternately: fix your callstack.)

2. EvalError: you're using eval() wrong.  but if you get this error, you *know* you're using eval() wrong, **BECAUSE YOU'VE USED EVAL() DON'T DO THAT!**

3. URIError: Raised when the encodeURI() or decodeURI() functions are used in an incorrect manner. (solution: use express. or koa. or hapi. or something. it's like handwashing your clothing: there are reasons you might want to be writing raw http requests, but usually you're just being silly.)

## Silent Errors
-- times when our code runs without breaking, but fails to give us the output that we want. these are the sad times. the dark times. the lonely times. 

### To-Do's for Silent Errors

1. Diagram out our desired data flow with a pen and paper.  Start tracing it out with console.logs, and try to find the point where we go from having the right outputs to the wrong ones. 
2. Check to make sure that we're actually executing the code we're expecting to: console.log just to make sure we're getting through to the blocks we should be. 
3. talk through what *should* be happening, with a teammate or fresh pair of eyes. see if anyone can spot a logic-error.  
4. Check the docs for the technologies you're using -- do built in functions return the data you expect, in the format you expect.  
5.  Brainstorm alternate ways to solve your problem.  What is the *goal* of your code?  If the approach you're debugging just isn't unfucking itself, could there be other ways of achieving the same goal?   
